[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For me, the big thing that
drove me into the natural
health field is a health
crisis in my own family,
and I see this a lot with
other health professionals.
But when I was in
eighth grade, my mom
was diagnosed with
cancer, and we
went through all the
traditional medical treatments.
We lived in what I
call the medical model,
and she went and had a
mastectomy, chemotherapy,
and praise God,
she got through it
and was diagnosis cancer free.
But really after she went
through the conventional
medical system, she was sicker.
She started having
thyroid problems,
autoimmune disease,
chronic digestive issues,
struggled with
clinical depression,
got put on three medications
and this went on for 10 years.
And after 10 years,
I was actually
working as a nutritionist.
I was in chiropractic
college working
on getting a natural
medicine certification
and she called me and
said, I've got bad news.
I've been diagnosed
with cancer again.
And this time, though, I flew
home and we prayed together
and we felt led to take
care of her all naturally,
and we started doing things
like juicing vegetables
every single day, eating
blueberries, bone broth,
and these foods every single
day transformed her lifestyle.
And after four months, we
went back to the oncologist,
and he said, this is incredible.
I've never seen this,
he said, but the tumors
have shrunk in half.
He said, come back a year later.
Went back a year later, she
was in complete remission,
and today, my mom
is in her mid 60s
and she's in the best
shape of her life.
She water skis, she
runs 5Ks with me
and just is doing amazing.
She says she feels better
now in her 60s then
she did in her 30s.
So really that experience
with my mom overcoming cancer
naturally is really a big part
of what drove me to the health
field and what's caused me to
practice like I do every day.
And one of the things I
tell all my patients is I'm
going to take care
of you like I would
my very own mom and my
very own family members.
That's really the way I
practice and what I teach today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, the biggest thing that
I teach my patients is food
is medicine.
It can be your
greatest form of poison
or the thing that can
help cure your body,
And so every time
we take a bite,
anytime we sit down for a meal,
we should think about that.
How do you use food as medicine?
I've had the opportunity to
work with Olympic-level athletes
and working with them on
their diet and nutrition.
One of the things I
love about working
with these professionals--
I was working back in 2009 with
some swimmers who were going on
to be Olympians, and the thing
I loved is that they were always
coming up to me
asking, Dr. Axe, what
do I got to eat right before I
workout and right after to get
just a split second faster?
And they're competing for
these physical gold medals,
but everybody should be
eating that same way.
We're competing for crowns in
heaven or to serve our family
or serve humanity, and so
the big thing that I just say
is eat like an
Olympian and really
focus on this meal you're
putting in your body.
Are you going to be
better because of that?
I think it's an important
thing to remember.
And in terms of the
industry today, we're
in a really unique place.
We have more toxic,
processed food
than ever in the
history of the world.
At the same time, we
actually have more access
to the world's superfoods
than ever before.
I mean, never before could we
ship in berries from the Amazon
rainforest and these really
incredible medicinal mushrooms
like Chaga from Russia and
chia from Mexico and South
America and all these
different superfoods.
So one of the things
I see a lot of times,
even in patients
today, is some of them
or a lot of America or the world
today, in general, the world
keeps getting sicker the
people that just decide
to eat what's offered them,
versus those people that
are really proactive and
think like Olympians.
They're the people
that can go and live
to be over 100 years old
because they have access
to all these superfoods.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Some of the biggest
autoimmune diseases
that are linked to gut
issues include all of them--
really, I would say, some
of the biggest conditions
are rheumatoid arthritis, lupus,
scleroderma, fibromyalgia,
MS are some big ones,
and so-- and those
are things I take care of
in my clinic all the time,
and probably the
biggest one overall
is Hashimoto's thyroiditis
and thyroid disease.
And a lot of people
don't know this,
but I would estimate
80% or more of people
with hypothyroidism actually
have the autoimmune form
of Hashimoto's disease.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We now know, through
clinical research,
it is an absolute that
autoimmune disease
begins in the gut.
Just as Hippocrates said
over 2,000 years ago,
all disease begins in the gut,
so does autoimmune disease.
So with autoimmune disease
here's really how it works
is there is a barrier in
between your bloodstream
and your intestines.
It's called your gut
lining, and your gut lining
has microscopic-- these
little holes in it.
What can happen over
time if somebody
has intestinal inflammation,
it opens up in large holes,
open up in your gut lining.
So what can happen
now is undigested
food particles, such as gluten,
casein, toxins, bad bacteria,
Candida can leak
from the intestines
into the bloodstream.
Your body says those
shouldn't be here,
it starts this immune response
and if that isn't corrected
over time, what can happen is
it starts autoimmune disease,
and that systemic inflammation
can affect the joints, causing
rheumatoid arthritis.
It can affect the
thyroid causing
Hashimoto's thyroiditis.
It can affect the their
colon, causing things
like Crohn's disease or the
muscles causing fibromyalgia.
So really all autoimmune disease
is first caused by leaky gut.
It starts in the gut lining.
And what happens
so often today is
patients are going to the
doctors with, let's say,
an autoimmune disease--
let's say Hashimoto thyroiditis.
They're treated in two ways.
Either they try and
suppress the immune system
or they try to directly
treat the thyroid.
The key is you heal
the gut lining,
the thyroid will naturally heal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I really believe
the biggest factors
that are causing this
gut reaction or leaky
gut in the body that causes
autoimmune disease are number
one, it's certain foods.
Sugar is a big one.
Sugar feeds Candida
and yeast in your body,
which causes this issue.
Genetically modified
organisms that
are wired with pesticides
and viruses, which kill off
beneficial microbes
in the gut, causing
leaky gut and
autoimmune disease,
also looking at hydrogenated
oils, refined grain products,
artificial sweeteners
are a big one.
All of these things contribute
to leaky gut and then,
of course, gluten and casein,
found in products like wheat,
conventional dairy products,
absolutely harm and damage
the gut lining are big ones.
But maybe the biggest
thing that causes
leaky gut and autoimmune disease
is actually emotional stress.
Emotional stress
is huge and when
somebody has the emotions of,
whether it's fear or anxiety
or just being overwhelmed
or frustrated,
it actually changes the
hormones within your body.
It makes your gut microbes
more susceptible to damage,
which then can cause leaky
gut, which then over time
leads to autoimmune disease.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My personal belief
system is this--
is that there is good wheat
and there's bad wheat.
There's grass fed
organic beef and there's
grain fed GMO conventional
beef, so I really
think there's a difference
between the products.
And I think if we're looking at
an ancient einkorn wheat that's
sprouted and then slow cooked
for a long period of time,
like it was done in the
Bible, like it was done
in Chinese medicine, like it's
done in the Middle East still
today, if it's
properly prepared,
I believe it can
be easy to digest.
There's studies showing
that lacto-fermented,
so fermented grains and
gluten, actually may not
affect celiacs, like
other types of grain,
so I actually truly
believe that the biggest
thing is that we're not
preparing our foods properly.
Now, do I believe that
necessarily even whole grain,
sprouted wheat, is
a therapeutic food
when I recommend it to somebody
that's chronically ill?
No, I don't think it's the best
most therapeutic food for that.
I think it's bone broth, it's
vegetables, it's berries,
it's herbs, getting
more of those things,
but in general, I think if
somebody's body is healthy
or, let's say, they're not
struggling with a major health
issue, I think doing a
sprouted, slow cooked,
ancient grain can be healthy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I would say the biggest
issue with sugar
is that it feeds bad
microbes in the body,
such as yeast and Candida.
What happens if somebody
has Candida overgrowth,
it starts to crowd out the
good bacteria in the gut.
And something a lot of
people don't realize
is that Candida and
yeast over time,
they start producing
toxins that eat away
at the gut lining
causing leaky gut, which
leads to autoimmune disease.
So sugar is absolutely,
if not number one,
it's definitely one
of the top three foods
that will directly
cause autoimmune disease
and leaky gut.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I believe Tom Brady
is absolutely right.
If you look at
Tom Brady, his age
at being a quarterback and
this effective is really--
we've never seen
it before, and so
for somebody who is actually
living what he's preaching,
I think it says a lot.
So with Tom Brady saying
that some of these large food
companies out there putting
these cereals that are loaded
with sugar, these sodas that
are loaded with sugar-- and not
just sugar, genetically
modified highly-processed sugar,
it absolutely-- it's
villainous to me
that companies are still
putting this out there.
It's toxic to
children, especially,
so I'm on board with Tom Brady.
I couldn't agree more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I believe the ultimate
diet for humans
is a traditional diet
or something very
similar to a diet
that was practiced
as part of Chinese medicine.
You look at areas of Asia that
have some of the longest life
expectancy in the world
and what they recommend
as a big part of their diet is
doing a lot of broths, chicken
broth and fish broth,
which is loaded
with collagen, which actually
slows the aging process.
It's very high in antioxidants.
And tea, such as green
tea and white tea,
which is therapeutic to the
body, very high-end vegetables,
half of the plate should be
vegetables, whether it's cooked
or raw or fermented
vegetables, are incredible,
such as sauerkraut or
kimchi, which is often
consumed in Asia today.
And then wild-caught meats such
as wild-caught salmon and fish
packed with omega-3 fats,
which reduce inflammation,
antioxidants like
astaxanthin, so I really
believe people's diets should be
loaded with vegetables, fruits,
bone broth, wild-caught
meat and last,
but certainly not
least, herbs and spices.
When you walk into someone's
home who's in the Middle East,
you can typically smell in
their kitchen herbs and spices.
This is something
we're completely
missing today in areas such
as America, Canada, Europe,
Australia.
We're not using enough
herbs and spices
like our eastern
counterparts, and so
adding more things like
cinnamon, ginger, turmeric,
rosemary, more of these
herbs and spices in our diet.
They are the most
powerful cancer fighters.
They're the most powerful
anti-inflammatories,
and everybody who is trying
to combat autoimmune disease
or any type of
illness can benefit
from getting more herbs
and spices into their diet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Essential oils were used
in biblical medicine.
They're referenced
more than 300 times.
Chinese medicine,
Greek medicine,
I mean they were part of the
cultures during that time,
and they've been proven
for thousands of years
to probably be the most powerful
form of plant-based medicine
on the planet.
And essential oils are
created by extracting
the water soluble from
the fat soluble compounds,
but not just the
fat soluble, it's
the very light and aromatic
fat soluble compounds that
are 1,000 times smaller than
most of the fats you'd find
in olive oil or coconut
oil, and the thing that
makes them unique is
because they're so small,
they're transdermal.
They can actually pass through
the skin into the bloodstream.
Also, you can inhale them.
They can pass through
the blood-brain barrier,
affecting the brain, and that's
why certain essential oils,
like frankincense, are
so powerful for their
anti-inflammatory properties.
They reduce neural and
brain inflammation.
They reduce inflammation
throughout the entire body
and help modulate
the immune system,
so if somebody has
autoimmune disease,
one of the biggest
essential oils I recommend
is frankincense
because of its ability
to support the immune system
and overall cellular health.
I also love lavender oil.
Lavender oil acts
as an adaptogen
by lowering cortisol
levels and stressors.
Great medical studies on
this also balancing out
insulin and blood sugar
levels, so lavender
is another powerful essential
oil, and even peppermint.
There are over 1,000
clinical studies done
on peppermint essential
oil, and even a great study
on its ability to fight
IBS, an autoimmune disease
within the gut,
so essential oils
are a powerful form of
medicine that I believe
everybody should be using.
And another great
benefit of essential oils
is by using them in your
personal care products.
You're reducing toxicity.
So many people are putting
things on their body and skin
that are toxic.
I make my own homemade
shampoo using aloe vera gel
and rosemary oil, which helps
naturally thicken the hair.
I make my own skin cream
using Shea butter and myrrh
oil and geranium and lavender
as a combination on my skin.
I make my own homemade
deodorant with sandalwood oil,
baking soda, coconut oil.
So another great thing
is that they absolutely
reduce toxicity.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, one of the reasons why
peppermint oil is so effective
is it has a cooling
effect on the body,
and what happens is-- just
even think about this yourself.
When you get really hot,
you start to get fatigued.
It starts to overrun your body.
The great thing
about peppermint oil
is it cools the body, which
actually allows your body
to perform at a higher
level so it can absolutely
oxygenate your system.
I want to mention this-- there
was a great clinical trial done
recently and they actually
found that those who just simply
smelled peppermint oil before
a day's work had better focus
and concentration
than those who didn't.
And I actually had a professor
who e-mailed me recently
and he said Dr. Axe, I do a
special formula and combination
for my students before tests.
It's a combination of peppermint
oil, vetiver, cedarwood,
and rosemary that he
says, I've actually
found it actually helps
improve the test performance
of the students I work with.
The other thing that--
I mean, this is just
sort of a side note,
but if you think about certain
medications or personal care
products people use
today like Icy Hot,
Icy Hot is essentially
taking compounds
that are found in things like
peppermint and wintergreen,
combining it with
other compounds that
are found in things like
ginger and cayenne pepper.
It's icy-- peppermint,
and wintergreen
have those compounds that help
cool and restrict vessels,
whereas ginger and cayenne warm
the body and help open it up.
I sprained my ankle when
I was in high school
and it would swell up, and
they did hot-cold therapy,
where I put an ice bucket,
and then I put it in a hot tub
back and forth.
The same thing happens when
you use essential oils.
If you use an essential oil
like black pepper and ginger
plus oils like wintergreen
and peppermint,
it does that sort
of constriction,
helps get fluid and flush
fluid from the area.
So it's pretty incredible when
you look at, really, again,
it's plant-based medicine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A lot of people don't realize
that certain emotions actually
cause disease in
specific organs.
This has been known
in Chinese medicine
for thousands of years.
Emotions of fear affect
the reproductive organs,
the kidneys, and adrenals.
Think about this--
if somebody has fear,
like a child gets really
scared, they can wet themselves.
Why does that happen?
Fear directly affects the
bladder and the kidneys,
causing that to happen.
If somebody is experiencing
the emotions of frustration
and anger, it's
toxic to the liver.
If somebody is
experiencing emotions
of grief and sadness
and depression,
maybe they lost a spouse
or went through a divorce
or had a trying time
in their life, that
affects the colon and the lungs,
which is your immune system.
If somebody has anxiety
and nervousness,
it affects the heart,
the small intestine,
and the nerve system.
And if somebody
is a big worrier,
it affects the
spleen, the pancreas,
as well as the stomach.
And so specific emotions drive
disease in specific organs,
and I can tell you from working
with thousands of patients,
taking care of the
emotional aspect of health
is just as important,
if not more important,
than changing the diet.
I've worked with,
again, a lot of patients
with this who have
suffered with disease,
and if people can really
combat those emotions-- when
my mom was diagnosed
with cancer,
she specifically had a lot of
emotions of fear and anxiety,
so we actually-- here's a
exercise that helps really
transform the mind.
She started writing
down affirmations
that were positive, taking Bible
verses and positive quotes.
She took out a
recorder and recorded
herself saying these healing
verses and proverbs and quotes.
She listened to it every morning
when she first woke up and then
every night before bed.
And she did this and I believe
that it was the key, really
the secret, to her overcoming
autoimmune disease, cancer,
and all the health problems
she was struggling with.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If somebody is really looking
to reduce stress, transform
their mind, combat fear,
anxiety depression,
these negative emotions, I
recommend several things.
Number one, scheduling
time for you.
So many people today,
moms especially, they
have zero mom time.
I mean, they're taking the
kids to sports practice,
they're maybe working.
They're taking care
of a whole family.
They get no time to themselves.
Blocking off you time to where
you're doing things you love.
Maybe it's lunch
with a best friend.
Maybe it's out walking.
Maybe it's shopping at the mall.
Whatever it is,
taking time for you.
Another thing I
recommend is healing bath
with essential oils
and Epsom salts.
Epsom salts contain magnesium,
known as the relaxation
mineral, so one cup of those,
20 drops of a relaxing essential
oil, such as lavender.
Soaking in a bath for 20
minutes every single night
is so great for naturally
relieving stress.
I would say, as well,
one of my secret weapons
for my patients is doing
a spiritual triathlon
every single day.
In the morning
spending five minutes
of doing each of these--
five minutes being grateful,
just saying everything you're
grateful for, another five
minutes reading something
positive, maybe it's
the Bible maybe it's a positive
quote or personal growth
book, and then five minutes
in prayer or meditation,
thinking about how this
principle you've just
read about is going to
positively affect you,
of your life, visualizing
how your day is going.
Doing that spiritual
triathlon can absolutely
transform someone's health.
And I have a history
of doing triathlons,
and I can just tell you every--
and I started doing this
and when I started doing
a spiritual triathlon,
it completely
transformed my life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think visualization is
probably the most powerful tool
out there today.
I'll give you a few
examples with my mom, who
was fighting cancer.
She would visualize herself
running around on a beach,
playing with her grandkids,
bringing her grandkids
to Disney, running
5Ks and winning them,
and just having
extraordinary health.
She also visualized
her immune cells
going and gobbling up
cancer cells and toxic cells
within the body, so she
visualized that and she healed.
In my own life, I can
tell you from goal setting
and having certain things I
needed to overcome in life,
you know, every time I visualize
and set specific goals,
I've seen it coming to
fruition every single time.
So I believe that
visualization is
one of the most powerful tools
at naturally healing the body.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I believe that we're seeing
a lot of research now coming
into where the mind
affects the body,
the body affects the mind,
and in order to heal the body,
we've got to start
with the mind.
It's our most important tool.
Today, we know that by simply
experiencing certain emotions,
it causes a flood of different
certain hormones in the body.
If you experience-- if
you're watching a movie
and you start
laughing, serotonin
starts flooding
throughout your system.
I mean, it's incredible.
If you experience anxiety,
or you start getting worried
about something,
immediately cortisol
starts rising the body, which
is known as your aging hormone.
So positive emotions
versus negative emotions,
they're more powerful
than any drug.
They're more powerful
than any food.
Having positive emotions
is an absolute key
to fighting disease naturally.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I absolutely believe finding
lasting fulfillment is
a couple of things.
One, it's having a connection
to your maker, to God,
and it's fulfilling
your purpose in life.
So many people
today, I think part
of the reason why there's
disease and illnesses,
people don't have a purpose.
I mean, if I didn't
wake up every day
and I didn't know what I was
here for, I would get lost.
I would feel depressed.
For myself, I know that
I'm called to win my race,
live my best life possible.
I know that God has put me here
to help people get healthy.
That's my mission.
And knowing that's
my God-given calling,
I get excited every morning.
I know that I have a mission.
I'm able to add value to people.
So knowing those two
things, number one,
I have a maker who
created me for good.
He absolutely loves me,
and being connected to God,
having a relationship
with him, knowing I
can go there and just talk
to him, have a conversation,
he cares about my life
and what's going on.
That's the most important,
fulfilling thing in my life,
and knowing I'm called
to serve people.
I'm called to love
God and love man,
and so, again, going out
there and loving people
the best way I can and
knowing that's my purpose.
It's what fulfills
me personally.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I would say in terms
of in order for people
to discover and learn their
purpose, take a minute
and write down your strengths.
Write down past
successes you've had.
Start to look at what
your strengths are.
Also, go to people
that you care about,
not people that are negative,
but people that you respect,
people that are positive,
encouraging, and ask them,
well, just be honest with me
what do you think I'm good at?
What do you think
my strengths are?
So self-reflection, getting
advice from mentors and others
about what you're
good at, I think
that's one way you
start to discover.
And then, sometimes, it's
through trial and error.
I mean you start going
out there and recognizing
mentors or people who are
doing what you want to do.
I remember doing this
years ago, seeing somebody
who had a really popular health
website, he was a physician
and saying, I want to do that.
I want to do what he's doing.
So that's another
great way to start
to recognize your own
strengths, your own passion,
your own purpose in life.
And the other thing is
through visualization.
One of the things I did
is I would just sit down I
would start praying to
God, and I said, God,
would you just show me what
you have for your life?
What is my purpose?
What do you have for me?
And just sitting there
meditating for minutes,
sometimes hours, and really
just thinking, visualizing it,
it's another great way
to discover your purpose.
[MUSIC PLAYING]